The Perfect Fit
Adipiscing amen bibendum nullam, locus molestie ut
libero sodales.
By Richard Ward

Thank you for downloading this ebook. With over 12
years of manufacturing experience in the apparel industry,
hopefully I will be able to inform you on the many aspects
of the garment manufacturing industry and provide insight
into the steps and processes you must follow to ensure
maximum success.
I started my manufacturing journey in 2009, aged 22
having not long graduated from University. Having decided
to move to Guangzhou, China to explore opportunities in
manufacturing, it would over time develop into starting a
business there to service small to medium clients and
assisting them with developing and launching their apparel
projects.
China in 2009 was a very di erent China to the one in
2023 and whilst many things continue to change, it still
remains as one of the best places in the world to get low
order quantity garments manufactured at competitive
prices to a very high standard.
Over the course of this ebook I will give a short brief

ff

background into China’s rise to prominence as a garments

manufacturer, before giving some geographic context when
it comes to choosing your supplier before moving into a
complete overview of the many processes and steps along
the way you need to follow to be successful in this industry.
Chapters are organised so you can jump backwards and
forwards to relevant areas that you need insight into and as
such get the guidance you need to ensure your project
development goes o as smoothly as possible.
Chapter 1:
Garment manufacturing
Chapter 2:
Understanding China. What you need to know before you
start nding and communicating with your suppliers.
Chapter 3:
Understanding garment design. The importance of
inspiration, sketching and creating technical drawings.

ff

fi

Chapter 4:

Fabric selection and sourcing. Choosing the right fabrics
for your project and matching them with the right supplier.
Chapter 5:
Pattern making. Arrange your own pattern making for
smoother prototyping.
Chapter 6:
Preparing everything before you reach out to suppliers.
What you need to have ready.
Chapter 7:
Understanding minimum order quantities and how they
are calculated.
Chapter 8:
Approaching factories and getting quotes on your design.
Chapter 9:

How to make sure you get good samples.
Chapter 10:
Making your adjustments clear so they are implemented
with ease.
Chapter 11:
Finding a suitable logistics partner that can handle your
shipment.
Chapter 12:
Preparing and Organising your order. Getting ready to
manufacture.
Chapter 13:
Quality control and pre-shipment inspection.

Chapter 14:

Relationship building with your supplier and staying
relevant.
Chapter 15:
Common issues and how to solve them.
Chapter 16:
Case Studies and examples. Both good and bad.
Chapter 17:
Resources, websites and apps to make the whole process
smoother.
Chapter 18:
Certi cations

fi

Chapter 19: printing, embroidery, screen, dtg etc.

Chapter 1
Garment Manufacturing - Getting the Tech Pack

I have written this guide in the context of manufacturing
garments in the far east, speci cally China. However
everything you read in this book is applicable to garment
development anywhere. The methods and approaches are
the same wherever you are manufacturing.
It is worthwhile to have a very brief word on China.
Without going into too much detail, I am sure many of you
reading this harbour some concerns when it comes to the
thought of manufacturing in China, especially after the
covid epidemic of 2019 2022. And whilst there are many
opportunities for garment manufacturing in many other

fi

-

south east asian countries, if you are looking for a surplus

of easy to access reliable manufacturers with low minimum
order quantities, China is unbeatable and will remain so for
many years to come.
And like anywhere in the world, there are good and bad
eggs. We may not entirely love the idea of “a powerful
China.” But that does not mean that the hard working men
and women running the factories are to be tarred with the
same brush.
In the twelve plus years I have been manufacturing in
China, I have found them generally easy to work with,
helpful and with a great work ethic that is great for
developing new business ideas. I will at the end of this book
delve into how you can leverage manufacturing
opportunities in other countries, namely Vietnam,
Thailand and Cambodia but for the purpose of having a
structure the theme of this book will primarily reference
how to do garment manufacturing in China.
The book will follow a chronological theme, taking
garment development from conceptualisation through the
creation of tech packs, to fabric selection, prototyping, size
grading, placing your order, quality control, packing and
shipping. We will explore geography of China to give some
insight in where to look depending on the type of garment
you are manufacture - yes this does matter, and how to

make sure you are buying factory direct wherever possible.
So without further ado, lets crack on.
Chapter 1
Of course everything starts with an idea or seeing
something somewhere and having the “I can make that
better moment.” So what’s next and how do you do it in a
way that will make the process as smooth as possible. As
putting your design into an easily readable format is quite
possibly the fundamentally most important part of your
entire garment manufacturing business. Make a hash of this
and the whole project has very limited chance of success.
But for a minute put yourself in the eyes of the factory. A
factory did not just pop up overnight and start sewing
garments. No. Quite often they have grown and developed
over many many years, sometimes decades. Many have
started as one sewing machine in a room that quickly
became two and then three and then four and so forth.
So a factory can only exist if there is a steady in ow of
regular work. By the time they are established and you’ve
found them online or on Alibaba they have got to a stage

fl

where they don’t really need the work. Not to say they

won’t take it - but many garment factories are extremely
selective about what orders they take on. How you
approach the factory here will dictate your chances of
success. Consider for a moment two di erent scenarios.
Scenario 1:
Dear Total Textile,
What is your price for 100 T Shirts.

ff

Regards, Joe.

Dear Total Textile,
Please

nd attached my tech pack for 220gsm 95%

Cotton 5% Spandex T Shirts.
Print should be screen print in 2 locations. (as per tech
pack)
We are

exible on quantities depending on your fabric

minimums but ideally would be looking for 5 size split with
20 piece per size, for a total of 100pcs
Please let me know if you have any questions and I will
try to answer them for you.
Regards, Joe
Imagine for a minute you are a factory receiving these
two e-mails. Which one merits your attention? And why?
The second one of course. Its detailed and speci c and lets
the factory know you know exactly what you want: you are
exible but have an idea of what you want and are aware
there are certain limitations that you can work around.
At the Idea LabGZ we receive between twenty and thirty

fi

fl

email enquiries a day and more than 50% of the enquiries

fi

fl

And Scenario 2:

are in the format of scenario one.Right o the bat, we have
written o

more than half of the enquiries as not being

valid enquiries. This is the mindset of the manufacturer. We
are generally extremely busy, managing orders, dealing
with the day to day of keeping the wheels turning and will
happily welcome new business provided is in the format we
need.
You don’t for example walk into a BMW dealership and
say I want a red one, how much? Far from it. You have the
speci cation and the extras to look over and you make an
informed decision based on your budget and what you are
looking for. But before you walk into the BMW garage
you’ve done your research. You must apply this thought
process when setting up your garment business.
Now that we understand the principles of setting things
up prior to reaching out to manufacturer, what follows?
How do you go from “lightbulb” yeah this is good idea
moment to moving closer to physical samples in your
hands.
Start with an inspiration or mood board. Get everything
you want to happen down on paper. Make notes, print
things o , annotate images and just collect everything

ff

ff

ff

fi

together. It doesn’t matter if it looks like a scrapbook of

fashionistas instagram feed - just get all that good stu
together in one place and start to bring your look together.
Take note on fabrics, t and style. We love it when clients
send us these, as it shows us that they have 1) done some
serious research on their product. 2) They know more or
less what they want and 3) they are ready to get the wheels
moving on developing their idea.
This allows us to take their notes and images and get
stuck right away into tech pack development. A tech pack
for those of you that may not know is a document that
details the speci cs of the garment you are trying to make.
They come in many di erent formats and styles but the
general principle is the same. A tidy compilation of the
clients design in an easy to read and understand format.
There is something of a divide regarding the opinion on
what makes a good tech pack. Some suppliers like
everything to be rigid, with every bit of information laid out
in painstaking detail. In our experience the best format of a
tech pack is something in between a sketch and the plans to
a nuclear bunker. And it works.
Whilst the tech pack needs to be detailed enough to show
the aesthetic of the garment, illustrate some measurements

ff

ff

fi

fi

and provide a general outline of the materials that need to

your own garment range you have an idea of how your
garment needs to look, but without fail there will be things
that change along the way. Many things will be con rmed
and nalised only when you receive the nal garment and
try it on.
With that in mind we start all our tech packs with a blank
slate. A sketch of the design is key along with all the crucial
measurements related to the sizing, and information on
logos and prints. Whilst we do include particulars on
details such as width of collar, length of sleeves, size of
logo, placement of logo and so forth - we need to keep it
exible.
Why?
If I had a penny for the number of times we had made a
sample according to a tech pack, the client received it and
then decided to make a bunch of iterations I’d be doing
more than ok. And this is to be expected. Nothing on paper
is rigid and until you set eyes on it, how can anybody really
know whether they are happy with the nished product or
not? Iterations are part of the game. And de nitely so with

fi

fi

fi

fi

fl

garment manufacturing. We understand that, so we work

fi

fl

be used. It needs to be exible and versatile. When starting

this allowance into the process of tech pack development.
With that in mind when you are commissioning someone to
do your tech packs, ensure there is a provision including
iterations and revisions. Many designers who develop tech
packs often charge for revisions or turn designs around so
quickly that often down the line they no longer have access
to your drawings and sketches. Garment development is a
process that takes months, so having someone in it for the
long run is a crucial part of getting it done. Before you
commission someone to do your tech pack do ensure they
allow revisions or failing that they provide you with the
original les so you can get them altered and adjusted by
another third party if needs be.
When it comes to nding people to do your tech packs,
of course Google is your friend. Other good places to look
at are

verr.com, upwork.com, and other free lancer

websites. We also “obviously” have a tech pack
development service and if you need help with those you
can reach out to us at design@idealabgz.com and we will

fi

fi

fi

put it together for you.

In summary.
The approach to the manufacturer is crucial to how well
your enquiry is received.
Part of that approach lies in how you present your
information.
Start with a complete and thorough mood board to help
you gather your thoughts and inspiration together prior to
tech drawing work.
A well thought out tech pack that looks good and has all
the information de nitely sends out the right message to
potential manufacturers that you are serious and
committed to this project.
Keeping the tech pack

exible and open to further

adjustments is essential as your design will change over the
course of development (guaranteed)
Tech pack providers can be found throughout the web on
sites such as verr.com, upwork.com and other freelancing

fl

fi

fi

websites.

Chapter 2: Understanding China.
Garment manufacturing goes on everywhere in the
developing and developed world. Its a business that is as
old as the needle and thread and as long as there are
people who can sew - there will be factories making
clothes. China has dominated the industry for many
reasons which I will explain in this chapter. But of course
there are plenty of options in other asian countries such as
Thailand, Vietnam, Cambodia, Malaysia, Indonesia as well
as further a eld such as India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and so
forth. I will give a bit of a background on China and how
the society operates. This is not necessarily science truth,
merely my understandings from my time living there so
what I write is of course totally subjective and not to be
taken literally.
Firstly it goes without saying China is massive. On a scale
you can’t imagine. Both in terms of population and land
mass. This is both a massive advantage and a curse for folk
like you and me as we tend to just think of China as one
place, but its really not. Over the years certain areas have
become specialised in certain industries thanks to
proximity of suitable materials markets, government led

fi

subsidies, a suitable climate, and a readily available work

place. For example the town of Jinjiang is famous for
producing sports shoes. 4 in 10 sports shoes globally are
made in the city of Jinjiang. You won’t nd anything there
but factories making sports shoes. Similarly a town in
Foshan makes nothing but bathroom faucets. Hundreds of
factories making nothing but bathroom taps. Shanwei is
famous for producing meth and there’s another town in
Henan province that is well known for turning, out of all
things hitmen and enforcers. So you can see, China’s
specialisation is very localised and it covers everything
from faucets to gangsters and it is often to speci c exact
towns or within certain regions. We will cover this
information in greater detail but the basic take away is, its
important to make sure you are in the right area of China
for the product you are making.
With the above in mind then it would be sensible to
assume there is in China a town or region that specialises in
garment production. And yes you are absolutely right there
is. With the garment industry being so massive it is actually
focused in a few di erent key areas but we will start with
the epicentre of it all. ZhongDa Fabric Market in Haizhu
District of Guangzhou. Spanning nearly 5 square kilometres
with over 100,000 stalls its big and complete. A 100km

fi

fi

ff

radius out from Zhongda Fabric market in either direction

Whilst I would not recommend anyone to visit this market
either alone or to just browse as you will get eaten alive it
allows us to put in context the importance Guangzhou
holds for the garment manufacturing industry. And further
more how might we leverage this nugget of information
when approaching factories.
The same goes of course for the type of garment
manufacturing. From undergarments to pu er jackets and
double denim out ts. There is a factory out there in China
specialising in every type of clothing in every type of niche
related to all the relevant export markets. For example
sportswear factories whose prime exports are to West
Africa. This is all related to specialisation and lowering
costs of production, which translates to higher pro ts and
newer Mercedes’s.
A factory specialising in sportswear, for example making
ym leggings and tank tops will have much lower costs of
production over time. Furthermore with a target export
market of West Africa they will be able to make sure that
their quality is consistent with what the market needs. All
these seemingly minor things that we as buyers may

fi

ff

overlook contribute to the factory being able to lower

fi

g

will cover over 35% of the worlds garment manufacturing.

overheads. And of course we as buyers need to make sure
we are not approaching a factory that makes denim for Kids
in South America with an order for oversized ym hoodies.
We will deal with the issue of being able to nd the right
factory for the job later on in this book.
Within the issue of geographical specialisation and style
specialisation there is one nal specialisation which we as
buyers frequently overlook. The question of quantity. The
relationship between higher quantity and higher pro t is
not always as close as you might think. Many factories out
there make a signi cant pro t margin on specialising on
doing low order work and there are many factories out
there doing high quantity work with much lower pro t.
Factories that deal with lower quantity are set up and
organised di erently to factories that are geared to high
volume manufacturing. That organisation stretches right
from the organisation of the sales roles right through to the
number of pattern makers and the way the production
lines are organised. Whilst factories follow similar set ups
and organisational structures they too are specialised to
best service the needs of the markets they provide for.
Furthermore there is the issue of quantity, which again is

fi

fi

fi

g

fi

fi

fi

fi

ff

factory speci c. Many and I mean many people come to me

asking why are some of the minimum order quantities from
Alibaba so high. Well for you to have found that factory on
Alibaba on page one or two means they paid a fair whack to
be there. Registration on these business to business
platforms costs thousands of dollars and up, combined
with the paid per clicking advertising ranking. To rank
number one or two for T Shirt manufacturing on Alibaba
will cost the factory a fair chunk of change. So when you go
to them and ask for

fty t shirts, it’s not that they don’t

want to do it, but they just can’t. On top of that it also of
course means that perhaps their pricing might be a little on
the high side.
These big boys on page one of Alibaba with all that pay
per click advertising going on will have also some pretty
steady large regular clients on the order book. In fact its
almost a given if you’ve found them on page 1 or page 2.
This means they are not always that vested in taking on
new clients. So they often try to price themselves out of the
work in the way that any sensible person would do. If you

fi

can’t be arsed, price it higher.

the tripwires along the way that can make the process of
nding a good reliable factory somewhat challenging.
Whilst the list if not exhaustive here are some of the types
of garments we typically manufacture:
1. T Shirts & Hoodies. (Cotton & Cotton Blends, Fleece
Style Fabrics)
2. Shirts & Blouses (Button down pullovers made from
woven fabrics)
3. Dresses and skirts (One piece garments, Linens,
Chi ons, Silks, Satins etc)
4. Pants, Shorts & Trousers (Woven & Denim)
5. Jackets and Coats (Outerwear with a wide range of
materials. Blazers, Leather, Trench Coats etc)
6. Sweaters and Cardigans (Knitted)
7. Jumpsuits and Rompers (One piece garments)
8. Suits (and co-ord sets)
9. Swimwear (Poly, Nylon, Spandex etc) Garments
designed speci cally for water.
10. Lingerie
11. Sleepwear (Linens, Cottons & blends)
12. Activewear and Sportswear. (Usually involving some

fi

spandex)

ff

fi

With that in mind you can perhaps get an idea of some of

Of course the list above is not exhaustive, there are also
things like medical scrubs, modesty clothing (abayas and
hijabs), hiking gear, uniforms for the workplace.
But what you have to do rst is decide what niche your
garment

ts into. With that in mind lets do a little case

study to see how we would pick a manufacture that’s
suitable for our niche.
Brief:
You want to make a tight tting quick dry top for people
who like to surf and scuba dive. As in people who are
actively in and out of the ocean doing water sports.
Obviously before you do anything - you’ve gone and got
your tech pack sorted. And you have all your info prepared
so when you start with the emails you are coming from a
position of knowledge and genuine interest.
Looking at the idea of a surf/diving top, yes you could say
its a sort of T Shirt, but your not going to be using cotton so
we can scratch that o the list. Swimwear factory perhaps?
Well maybe but I would hanker a guess that they are mostly

fi

fi

ff

fi

specialised in producing things like board shorts and

bikinis. So asking them to develop and produce something
that looks like a T Shirt, but uses material from the
swimwear niche may be a little challenging.
I’d say you need to be hitting up factories in the
activewear and sportswear niche, and for good reason.
1. They are going to have made plenty of hiking tops,
cross

t tops, tops for mountain biking, tops for ym

rats and tops for people who want to throw something
underneath their

eece when they go skiing. The

applications are di erent but the general purpose is the
same.
2. They will most likely have access to a huge range of
fabrics that are varied in their composition and weights
and will be in a better position than the other factories
to source a fabric that is suitable for your needs.
3. Whilst not familiar with the speci c needs of a shirt
for sur ng will de nitely have experience in
manufacturing for a wide range of outdoor activities
which will make them invaluable when it comes to
re ning your prototype and working on iterations.
4. They will have value added input when it comes to
things like size grading, logo applications, can and can’t

g

fi

fi

fl

ff

fi

fi

fi

dos. Limitations of fabric applications and usages.

Now you know what kind of factory you need to be
looking for, its time to apply some geographical knowledge
and make sure your looking in the right area of China.
Remember the key points from chapter 1. First o

make

sure we looking for factories in the town that produces
athletic wear, this basically translates to more readily
available labour, more competition, closer access to
materials markets as well as more choice. Second to that we
need to make sure we are not looking in an area that
predominantly produces goods for a di erent market to
your target market. If you are based in the US or Europe,
then you need factories that cater to the western market.
Clients based in Africa, Asia and the Middle East will have
slightly di erent price points to consider and should
evaluate those factories accordingly.
I can give a generalised breakdown of manufacturing in
China for you, but each project is always a case by case
project so for this one, your on your own and nothing beats
independent research. However somethings to bear in
mind.
There are two mega provinces in China, namely
Guangdong and Zhejiang. If Guangdong is the engine room
of China, then Zhejiang is like the warehouse of China.

ff

ff

ff

Guangdong is made up so many million plus people cities it

climate conscious vegans (as in those who don’t eat meat
on environmental grounds, but that’s an argument for
another book). I’ve been to backwater towns with four
million people plus and you couldn’t even nd them on a
map.
Guangdong as a province is one of the most developed in
China, and is headed up by three big manufacturing and
innovation hubs. Shenzhen, Guangzhou and Dongguan.
Followed shortly behind with Zhuhai - famous (if you are
interested) for producing printer ink. Something like 70%
of the worlds printer ink comes from Zhuhai.
Lets start with Guangzhou, or GZ as its known amongst
the

large resident expat population. GZ is a trade hub.

Huge markets, logistics companies, trading o ces, host of
the bi-annual canton trade fair, hot sweaty workshops with
wobbly ceiling fans on the 3rd oor of apartment buildings
and grandiose 4

oor fully integrated automated

production lines.
It has it all. One minute your shoulder to shoulder in
cramped fabric markets pulling o yards by the roll, forty
ve minutes later your staring at 200 sewing machines

ffi

fi

fi

ff

fl

lined up, pristine and ready to go. Its a city of haves and

fl

fi

would make your eyes water, de nitely something to tell

trying to have, where fabric-laden tricycles make their way
past Bentleys and S Class Mercedes with tinted windows. It
is a giant in the manufacturing world and a great bulk of
that is accounted for with garment manufacturing. So
Guangzhou really is a great place to start your search for a
garment manufacturer.
Shenzhen is a tech hub, home of Foxconn, Not a spy
agency Huawei, Xiaomi, Tencent and all the other big odd
sounding names we’ve heard more and more of in recent
years. The city is split into two distinct parts, with some big
business o ces putting down roots in Luohu and Futian fuelled almost entirely by its proximity to Hong Kong. You
can walk from most parts of Futian to the HK border. As
you head out North from Shenzhen centre you arrive in
areas such as Longgang, Longhua and Pingshan. Out here
are some seriously large and impressive factories. I was
invited to visit the Foxconn compound as part of a project
we were working on and I had an easier time entering fancy
cocktail bars in Manchester as a penniless student.
In terms of you and me starting out in the garment
manufacturing business, Shenzhen is for the most part not
well suited to our needs. So, why mention it then? Well

ffi

because when you start hitting up contacts on Alibaba, you

will see a lot of them say they are based out of Shenzhen.
Huge Red Flag. Just leave them be. None of these are
factories, mostly they are trading companies operating in
Futian and around. Failing that they are big boys out in the
boonies running contracts for companies like Nike and not
a

t. So in summary, just

at out avoid Shenzhen. None

starter.
Dongguan has a bit of a juicy history. As the story goes
before Xi Jing Ping took power Dongguan was an industrial
powerhouse, but not so much because of its manufacturing
prowess, that came secondary, but the quality of
manufacturing was driven by its seedy underbelly.
Dongguan had positioned itself in the early 2000s as the
prostitution capital of China. Every hotel was a front for the
oldest profession and it was the prostitution that brought
the manufacturing in. Factories could entertain clients and
bend their rubber arms by showing them round the factory,
o ering up some half decent prices and taking them to the
KTVs and SPAs for a “ruddy good time.” It worked very well
for Dongguan for many years. Good factories located next
to good hotels for visiting clients (predominantly male) not

fl

fi

ff

far from lavish and extravagant brothels.

That ended almost as soon as it started and when Xi
came to power, he turned the pink lights o overnight. Its
di cult to even get a head massage in Dongguan now. But
what remains is a vast network of highly skilled and
specialised factories that produce great quality product at
a ordable prices within a days trip from two major
transport hubs; Hong Kong (Shenzhen) and Guangzhou. So
if your talking to someone on Alibaba and they say they are
based out of Dongguan, your o to a good start.
These are the three biggies in Guangdong, but the
province is massive and there are countless other small
towns that have established their own manufacturing hubs.
In terms of garment production, Shunde, Foshan,
Zhongshan, Qin yuan, Huizhou, Jiangmen and Zhaoqing
are all reputable cities. But for the sake of keeping it simple
and you getting the most out of this book, start with
Guangzhou and Dongguan.
In north China we have another economic powerhouse of
a province, Zhejiang. So Zhejiang is the province that
encompasses Shanghai, but there is little that really brings
the two together other than a fast train and a mutual hatred
of Guangdong. And as with my commentary above on

ff

ff

g

ffi

ff

ignoring Shenzhen as a potential location for a

manufacturing partner, you should do the same with
Shanghai. Over priced, not competitive and very little
actual on the ground manufacturing there. For the most
part you will be dealing with a sourcing or trading o ce.
Zhejiang is rich. Second after Guangdong. Some cities in
Zhejiang have more millionaires per capita than elsewhere
in the world. While Guangdong got ahead o ering itself as
the engine room of China, Zhejiang has positioned itself as
more of the market oor. From a garment manufacturing
perspective, I don’t think Zhejiang is a great option for
starting out (I personally source all my manufacturing out
of Guangdong) but nonetheless we can review some of the
cities and what they o er so you have the information to
hand.
Hangzhou the provincial capital is most well known for
being a hub producing silk garments, with a rich history in
silk production. If you are working with silk products then
for sure Hangzhou should be on your radar. But Guangzhou
and Dongguan too also compete well in this space, so
personally I would choose them over Hangzhou.
Ningbo, a coastal town which doubles as the main port
for export of goods has plenty of factories working in the
activewear and sportswear niche. I have visited a few here

ffi

ff

ff

fl

and found for the most part they were largely unsuitable

due to their higher MOQs per fabric request. But if you have
the capacity to produce 500pcs and up per design then
Ningbo is worth a look.
The next one which I am sure many people have heard of
is Yiwu. Think of Yiwu as a giant wholesale market. The
Futian market has absolutely everything you can think of
and you just can’t comprehend its size. Having visited Yiwu
a good many times over the years its a very odd place. On
the one hand you can go in there with a spec to

nd

something and have it in your hands within half an hour.
Literally everything you can think of from fashion jewellery
to garden furniture. On the other hand however if you go
into to just browse and look around you will nd yourself
lost in a matter of minutes and nothing will look remotely
interesting. Kind of like those funny mosaic pictures where
you have to squint at them and it shows a picture of a
dolphin, but if you just look at it normally you see nothing
but a collection of dots and squiggles.
The Yiwu market is huge and comprehensive. And it gets
an insane amount of foot tra c. The tiny booths in the
Yiwu market where people buy and sell their goods cost
more than a mayfair at. 10s of millions of dollars for some
of the prime real estate - as in booths located near or next
to the main stairwells. I always found this surprising when

fi

fi

ffi

fl

most of the product that comes out of the Yiwu market is

absolutely rubbish in terms of quality [but it is ridiculously
cheap]
Rumour has it Yiwu works by buying the factory ends
from overs, unders and defective from the many factories
around China. Let me give you two examples.
Example 1.
Client places an order with a factory for

ve thousand

baseball caps. The factory makes a complete dogs dinner of
the whole thing, doesn’t get paid by the client. The contract
is never ful lled. The factory can then often o oad their
defective goods to the Yiwu market at 40 50%. They are
basically selling the goods to Yiwu at less than or close to
the cost of production to just recover some initial costs.
Example 2.
Client places an order with a factory for

ve thousand

baseball caps. The factory actually buys enough material
for six thousand. The cost of producing the extra thousand
baseball caps is negligible as they already over ordered on
the fabric. So they make extra and sell it to the market to

ffl

fi

fi

-

fi

cover some costs.

What does this mean in terms of buying from the
market? You have a 50/50 chance your buying shite
product or overs. And its very hard to know, especially so if
you are buying on a continuous basis. But the base line is
clear. Product in Yiwu is not being made speci cally for the
market. It is surplus product that nds its way there (except
maybe for fashion jewellery)
So look not to put you o Yiwu, it has its merits. If you
are driven by price and are really looking to capture as
much pro t as possible then for sure head over to Yiwu and
get stuck in. If your focus is structured around developing
your brand the price paid is the price paid (providing
quality is right) then avoid it like the last round at the pub
before closing. No need.
There isn’t much need to go on and on and on about
every city in China that makes this and makes that. As a
new entrepreneur entering into the garment
manufacturing industry the summary is quite clear. If you
arelooking for a reputable factory to assist you with
developing your product and growing your brand then
Guangzhou and Dongguan should be your

rst stop.

fi

fi

fi

ff

fi

Everything is set up here for clothing production, in terms

of accessibility to fabrics, readily available labour and
getting in and out for inspections.
Once you’ve located your potential partner factory, you
de nitely need to crack on with doing your due diligence. It
is now your job to nd out as much as you can about your
potential business partner. Really go under the hood, dust
o

the seat covers, get down on your knees and have a

good look underneath for any leaks or cracks. The big one
and a great starting place is location. Where is the factory
located? And if you don’t know - its your job to get that
factory address asap. Anyone that says our trading o ce is
located here and the factory is over there is talking
nonsense. No such arrangements exist. Unless they are
absolutely massive factories, and if that’s the case, its highly
likely they are not a good t for us. We are looking for low
key and small operations. When you get the address for the
factory, just drop it into google maps and see where it
lands. If it looks close to any large or prominent
commercial buildings then give it a miss, its not a factory.
Factories do not locate themselves in the commercial

ffi

fi

fi

fi

ff

business district.

Chapter 3:
Getting ready for sampling - and ensuring it goes as
smooth as possible.
Now lets assume we have at least found a handful of
suitable manufacturers that we can work with that are in
our relevant niche. Our tech packs are done and dusted.
Sitting in a folder on our desktop ready to be assessed and
worked on. Before we start engaging with factories and
working on developing our product wouldn’t it be helpful if
we had an idea of what the estimated unit cost might be
and how many pieces we might need to buy.
First step - lets try and approximate how much fabric we
need for our garment. So open your tech pack and get a
look the dimensions. Take note of the chest measurement
(or a measurement that relates to the widest point of the
garment), double it and add half. So if the chest is 32
inches, double it to get 64 and add half of 32 to get 80
inches. Then take the length of the garment - so for this you
might take the leg measurement or the sleeve (whichever is
relevant) and add half. So for a leg measurement of 35 add
say 17 to get 52 inches. Of course this is very rough and

crude way of calculating things but it helps to give you an
idea. You need an area of fabric equivalent to 80 inches by
52 inches per garment. So converting it into cm approximately 2m in length of fabric per garment.
Quick note - any purists out there I am sure will balk at
this crude methodolo y, however its just designed to be a
quick go to model to evaluate approximate fabric usage per
garment in record time. You can simplify this even further
if you wish and basically say T shirts, Shirts, Pants, Jackets
need 2 m of fabric. And you can estimate up and down
from there. Bigger, heavier, bulkier garments such as
overcoats, large dresses and such need more fabric and
things like crop tops, shorts etc use much less fabric. By all
means eye ball it - it does not need to be exact. It is not as
complicated as people will tell you or make it out to be. Just
pick a number between 1m and 3m and you have a
33.33333% chance of being right.
Pencil that in then. The approximate fabric usage is
around 2m per garment as per the measurements I have

g

taken from my tech pack.

Next lets look at the construction. Count the number of
pockets, zippers, cu s, collars, buttons and list them all
out. Round it up to $0.25 per and work out a total number.
For example: Linen Trousers.
2 x Pockets @ $0.25
1 x Front Fly / Zipper @$0.25
3 x Button @$0.25
A total of $1.50 in bits and bobs. And lets err on the side
of caution and add another $0.50 just for good measure. So
lets settle on the nice round even number of $2 for peace of
mind.
Obviously if you want to use hand crafted gold plated
buttons you need to re-work this model and allow some
extra dollars for those nice heavy gold buttons, but the
average fashionista launching their brand on instagram
should be able to budget and estimate in this way. We don’t
need to be exact, we just need to get an idea of what stu is
going to cost. Waiting patiently behind in line is the matter
of printing and logo application. Logos come in a variety of
forms and I don’t need to list them all out as you know
what you want but things such as screen printing, digital

ff

ff

printing, embroidery, laser logos, stamped logos are the

few distinct parts. There is the set up fee, the application
fee and the logistic cost.
This is the cost for the factory to set up the equipment
for working your logo onto your garment. Think of it like a
minimum fee for the guys time. Let’s take an arbitrary
gure of $200 USD. If you print 50 T Shirts or 100 T Shirts,
the guy needs $200 USD. Its a cost for him to set up the
machine and do the work. The more T Shirts you print, the
cheaper the unit cost becomes. Now obviously if you go
and print 500 T Shirts, that

gure of $200 might change

somewhat, but the unit cost per print may not change, or it
may even be less. The logistic cost is the cost for shuttling
the fabric back and forth from the factory to the printing
shop. China is massive, so do make sure everyone is
working within at least 50 miles of each other.
A note on printing - which is something of a dirty
industry and as such being subject to very heavy regulation
in China recently. The printing part of your manufacturing
process is de nitely the weakest link. Firstly, it is always out
sourced to a printing partner to handle, who is working on
very tight margins and entirely dependent on volume. So if
you send him 100 T Shirts to print and Mr Wu’s factory
down the road rocks up with 1000 T Shirts to print, your

fi

order gets queued and you have to wait. Properly

fi

fi

usual suspects. Logo application can be broken down into a

frustrating but somewhat understandable when your
business model depends on making $0.15 pro t a unit. It is
printing which often impacts most signi cantly on a lead
time. Everything else can be done on time and run
smoothly and you get to printing and hit a stone wall. There
is not much you can really do other than to just plan for it
and accept that sometimes things go awry.
Printing also throws up some other problems that
you will have to deal with. Defective product. Whilst we all
want the people we pay money to, to do their job properly
printing is one of those things where it is hard to get the
kind of attention to detail we might get from say a jeweller,
or a bespoke tailor. Its a numbers game. But not only that,
its a numbers in as short a space of time possible game. In
an ideal world your manufacturer should assist you to
control this part of production, and to be fair most of them
will to great e ect. But do remember, the lower the price
you pay for something the more short cuts and cost cutting
that is going on and the harder it is to control and even
harder to put right when it does go wrong, not if but when.
We would often price this in and work with the CMT
supplier to set the parameters for printing and pay a small

fi

fi

ff

fee for some oversight.

The last part of the puzzle for approximating the unit
cost of manufacture is what’s known as the CMT price, the
cut make trim price, basically the labour cost for
assembling the garment.
Labour in Asia generally is not as cheap as it used to be.
Rapid industrialisation and development has pushed
labour costs higher and higher. That coupled with a
preference amongst many young people to work in white
collar works has meant that the supply of blue collar work
has contracted signi cantly. In fact many young people
would rather make $200 USD a month working in an o ce
wearing a polyester suit than sew in a factory for $500 USD
a month. Perception is everything in Asia and what’s
perceived as a good job is often not the same as a well paid
job. I have visited hundreds and hundreds of factories
across Asia in my 12 years plus out here and I have never
seen child labour with my own eyes. Not to say it doesn’t
exist, I am sure it absolutely does. Most of what I say in the
factories during my visits were middle aged (say 45+)
women who were highly skilled and in demand. Often
many of these middle aged seamstresses are making two or
three times what the young white collar o ce workers are
making 50 miles away in the CBD. In fact demand for
seamstresses can be so high that during busy season sewing

ffi

ffi

fi

periods they can demand two or three times their usual

rate. But it doesn’t stop there. As most seamstress work is
arranged on demand as per the order requirements,
sometimes they will start production and get half way
before having a mass co-ordinated forced renegotiation of
the rates in the middle of an order. An absolute headache
for the factory owner as it disrupts order

ow and

decimates margin.
One factory owner, a chap from Hong Kong who set up
on the mainland outside of Guangzhou, who I have known
for many years and consider something of a family friend
has told me stories of the seamstresses just refusing to
come in to work en masse until their demands are met,
e ectively holding the boss man to ransom. And this is not
because they are not paid well, but simply because they
know they are in high demand and a good seamstress is
indispensable. The whole labour market in Asia is
extremely complex and heavily layered in such a way that is
not as black and white as the issues such as child labour
and working 18 hour days. Not to say it doesn’t go on, I am
sure it does - just it is not the norm.
Making a T Shirt is not the same as making a Ladies
dress. And the CMT price re ects that. But you can eyeball
it for sure and just make an educated guess. That’s all it is.
Just making educated guesses. Look at a T Shirt and if you

fl

fl

-

ff

said yeah “$4 5 USD per piece as a labour cost.” You

wouldn’t be too far wide of the mark. De nitely there are
lots of things that in uence the CMT price [quantity, t,
style, sizing splits etc etc] and it may turn out the CMT
price is $5.53 - but we don’t need to be exact. As long as we
are ball park and are sure we aren’t getting screwed, that’s
good enough. Something more complicated like a dress just
add a bit more. Look at it and go ok yes I can see some
more processes here, de nitely more work to be done. So
lets ball park the CMT price at $10 USD. A good exercise,
and I used to do this is to pick up a pair of pants in H&M or
wherever and just dissect

In line with these little add ons and extras is the issue of
printing, or should I say logo application as it may come in
embroidered form, patchwork or otherwise. Regardless the
process is pretty similar.
Printing and embroidery very rarely happens inside the
garment manufacturer. It is more often than not in most
cases out sourced to a partner factory who specialises in
working with screen prints, embroidery and so forth.
Which makes sense right as we talked about before that
most manufacturing in China and Asia generally is geared

fi

fi

fi

fl

around specialisation

All that’s left now is to work out what is commonly
known as the Cut Make Trim cost (or CMT). There aren’t
too many 3 letter acronyms in the world of garment
manufacturing but this one is a good one to know and
throwing it around when talking to your manufacturer will
de nitely let them know you have some sense of what you
are trying to do.
The next thing on the list is to work out our labour cost
per item. Or the CMT price. How much does it cost to cut
the fabric, trim the fabric and make the garment. Yep - this

fi

is the CMT.

As part of your due diligence you want to

nd out as

much as you can about your potential partner factory, and
the

rst thing we need to

gure out is where they are

located. Like any big city, and Guangzhou is no exception;
t h e c e n t re i s o c c u p i e d w i t h o

ce blocks, not

manufacturing. So you want to be sure that the person your
talking to is located in the factory. Anyone that says “Oh
this is our trading o ce, our factory is located in Town X.”
Is talking nonsense.
A factory does not waste money on renting a trading

fi

ffi

fi

ffi

fi

ffi

o ce in the downtown because they are not dependent on

foot tra c. This is the

rst indicator of the fact you are

maybe talking to a trading company instead of a
manufacturer. In the interest of running a more seamless
operation, most factory owners like to have everything
under one roof. Also it makes sense from a

nancial

perspective - especially in Guangzhou where rental costs
downtown give downtown Manhattan and even Singapore
a run for their money sometimes. So you have to correlate
the information they give you with what you can nd out.
And you have to do it in such a way that you don’t turn
them o or rub them up the wrong way.
In my early years as a sourcing agent for Disney when I
was scouting out factories, I would always start with my
comprehensive and complete brief which usually gets the
sales agent tails wagging and then I would frame my
questions in such a way that let them know I was actively
looking for the most suitable supplier. Granted my situation
then was a little di erent from the situation now, where we
are looking to get entry into a new market with low order
quantities. But there are always ways to exploit a situation
to make it work to your advantage. Of course start with
sending them brief, this is crucial to get them to pay
attention to you and consider you as a serious buyer. Then

fi

fi

fi

ff

ffi

ff

once that initial rapport has been established, situate

yourself to let the supplier know you need to verify some
information as part of the sourcing process. By having that
golden brief in hand, you’ve already set yourself apart from
over 50% of the time wasters that knock on their doors. So
well done. One method that I would use and it would work
quite well for me is I would approach the factory and say
something along the lines of.
“Hey Linda, So I currently make this garment in (insert
place) and am looking to move production to Guangzhou
for (insert reason). Whereabouts in Guangzhou are you
based?”
1. You demonstrate intent and knowledge
2. Looking to qualify their suitability.
3. Establish yourself with some understanding - which
will come in handy when it comes to pricing things up.
If they don’t give you an exact address or are a little bit
vague on the details you can put a worm on the hook and
dangle that line. Something along the lines of “I’ve got a
sample I want to send to you to check, can you send me the
address for you to receive my sample?” That will yield
results. And of course if by some o chance they don’t want

ff

ff

to share an address with you, then you can cross them o

the list. And don’t worry you don’t have to send them
anything until you are ready - and you can tell them that
directly.
“Thanks Linda for the address. I will review everything
and be in touch about sending a sample to you.”

